### Overview

#### Introduction:

The Immunology Database and Analysis Portal
(ImmPort)( <https://www.immport.org/home>) repository aims to be a
trustworthy data resources as an essential component of the research
enterprise focusing on immunological research.  ImmPort offers support
to the community by providing resources including secure, reliable, and
scalable computing systems and infrastructure to operate the data
repository; long term archival and data preservation; integration and
curation of disparate data sets and data types in specific domains and
across clinical, laboratory and computational areas; data sharing, data
management, and dissemination following the FAIR Data Principles -
Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability;
development of and adherence to standards and best practices for data
collection, presentation and exchange; and training in deposition and
use of data and tools. To achieve its mandate of FAIR data sharing,
ImmPort transforms the shared data into a more user-friendly resource to
enable reuse of the data to gain new insights and findings to advance
immunology research. To date, ImmPort has shared 482 studies
encompassing various data types and organisms. Further, ImmPort
repository has participant level data from 145 clinical trials that are
openly available for reuse
(<https://immport.org/shared/search?filters=clinical_trial:Y>).

#### Clinical trial data for use:

  - Latest study listed under clinical
    trials: <https://www.immport.org/shared/study/SDY472>

  - Associated
    publication: <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31636302/> (open
    access)

  - Dataset has demographic and clinical information along with
    mechanistic study files.

Machine readable data is available via ImmPort
API: <https://docs.immport.org/#API/DataQueryAPI/dataqueryapi/>

#### Scenario:

  - Retrieve study metadata and associated data via API or from website

  - All Immport studies are searchable using study metadata API

  - Assess FAIRness of the metadata/data using the RDA FAIR data
    maturity Indicators

  - Convert metadata/data into FHIR standard

  - Assess FAIRness of the metadata/data again using the RDA FAIR data
    maturity Indicators

  - Analyze changes to FAIRness (if any)
