### Overview

In medical research, extensive data collections are collected at great
personal and financial expense, which are subject to a wide range of
regulatory requirements due to their nature: person-related, sensitive
subject data. Although the idea of data sharing is now supported by many
clinical researchers, there is a lack of mechanisms for the structured
processing, permanent storage and organized release of interoperable
data to external scientists.

![Immagine che contiene testo Descrizione generata
automaticamente](leipzigHealthAtlas-1.png)

The Leipzig Health Atlas (LHA) serves as a research data management
repository for archiving and sharing data(sets) from scientific projects
in the biomedical and medical informatics fields. It includes data and
publications from research studies such as clinical trials,
epidemiological cohorts or registries.

The LHA is guided by the FAIR principles (Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, Reusable). Currently, more than 18 research consortia
contribute data from the domains of lymphoma, glioma, sepsis, hereditary
colorectal and breast cancer, among others. The target audience includes
clinicians, epidemiologists, geneticists, pathologists,
biostatisticians, and digital patient model developers. The LHA is
publicly available - some content subject to legal access restrictions -
at https://www.health-atlas.de.

### Technical background

The architecture of the LHA portal is based on the freely available
software [SEEK](https://fair-dom.org/platform/seek/). Additional tools
for hypothesis generation (i2b2), visualization
([tranSMART](https://transmartfoundation.org/)), interactive modeling
for risk assessment (based on [R-Studio
Shiny](https://shiny.rstudio.com/)) or deployment
(Docker/[Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/)) are offered on a
case-by-case basis. Before making datasets available, it is necessary to
curate the data and metadata, obtain permissions from the data owners,
consider the required privacy criteria, and assign semantic tags for
better discoverability. In the course of data extraction, contractual
and technical access procedures must be established and implemented.

### Example clinical trial (HNSCC study)

The HNSCC study is an observational cohort study that characterizes head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) with different HPV16 DNA and
RNA (E6\*I) status. The database used in the publication consists of
clinical data from the hospital information system and genomic data from
tumor sequencing. In order to support the reproducibility of research
and to promote the reuse of data, the clinical data are offered in
various data files compliant to different standards, including for
example simple comma separated data or complex structures according to
the [CDISC ODM
standard](https://www.cdisc.org/standards/data-exchange/odm).

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><img src="leipzigHealthAtlas-2.png" style="width:4.87568in;height:2.51077in" alt="Immagine che contiene testo Descrizione generata automaticamente" /></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>URL:Â <a href="https://www.health-atlas.de/studies/33">https://www.health-atlas.de/studies/33</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Options for utilizing HL7 FHIR

Interoperability and traceability are key issues for a research data
repository that wants to make data available to third parties for reuse
in secondary research projects. Experience shows that the existing
processes for requesting and extracting data are not sufficiently
descriptive, so that, for example, questions about the semantics of
individual data elements or the provenance of the data sources and
transformation processes must be clarified for each individual
requester.

An investigation has already been conducted regarding the compliance of
the LHA to the [indicators developed by the RDA FAIR Data Maturity Model
Working
Group](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-data-maturity-model-wg/outcomes/fair-data-maturity-model-specification-and-guidelines-0).
In principle, the results were satisfactory, but there were major
weaknesses in the area of reusability.

The use of HL7 FHIR allows a clearly detailed description of contextual
attributes of data and data sets. Currently, plans are underway for the
programmatic implementation of a semi-automatic generation of a data
export in FHIR under the recommendations of the implementation guide
presented here.

### Outlook and future utilization

The Leipzig Health Atlas is to be expanded in the long term to become
the U Leipzig medical faculty's research data management platform. More
importantly, it will also serve as a basis for the realization of
distributed *Local Data Access Points* within the framework of the
[National Research Data Infrastructure for Personal Health Data
(NFDI4Health)](https://www.nfdi4health.de/en/). Furthermore, the concept
will be established in the SMITH consortium of the Medical Informatics
Initiative for making research data available.
